@def title = "Minlu Li / Rational Akratic Actions"
@def tags = ["essays"]

# Rational Akratic Actions

@@abstract
In this paper, I will discuss what are akratic actions and argue that they can be rational, despite others calling such actions a failure in agency. I argue that such arguments often assume the definition of rationality, agency and how the two connects.
@@

## Introduction

Imagine a scenario: Student Z is deciding between two courses of action to take during the first extended break of the semester. She considers whether she should focus on writing an important paper during the break, for the paper is due shortly after the break, yet she has barely made much progress. Conversely, she also considers spending more time with her best friends by going on a trip with them, for this is their last year at the university. Realistically, we might say that Z should have tried balancing her work life and social life better by working ahead if she actually had wanted to spend more leisure time with her friends. Otherwise, we would expect Z to work on her paper -- for we do believe that such action is more valuable in the long term than the short trip with friends. Similarly, Z has pondered and come to the conclusion that all things considered -- with all available reasons that she could think of at the time -- she should write the paper. Nevertheless, Z ends up on the trip with her best friends. A case like this is what philosophers would call akrasia. The problem of akrasia has many formulations; here we adhere to a modified version of philosopher Donald Davidson’s account[^1]

1. X believes that action A is better than action B 
2. Action A is better than action B
3. X does action B

The puzzle of akrasia is, as presented, the fact that Z has chosen to do action B while believing that action A is better than B, all things considered. At the same time, with her own set of relevant reasons, she believes that A is better than B. So it seems that Z’s decision to perform action B is of a different kind than just any ordinary action—it is purposefully not optimal. It is different, for example, from the act of choosing the shortest route to go to school. We see Z’s decision as incomprehensible to the extent that it seemingly lacks reasons, yet we instinctively can understand Z quite well. Akratic actions are everywhere—think about whenever you consciously do not choose to pursue the better alternative available. Because akratic actions are by definition choosing some non-optimal actions, some claim that they are inherently irrational. Furthermore, some may claim that akratic actions show that we as agents are defected in our ability to direct our actions.

Presumably, being able to direct our actions here would mean choosing the best action available. An underlying argument that says that ‘akratic actions suggest a defect in agency’ is that a full-fledged agent is ‘rational’. The two words are almost interchangeable. However, it is also here that I find the argument for the intrinsic irrationality of akratic actions to topple. The problem this paper seeks to clarify is whether all akratic actions are a defect in agency–therefore, rationality. Namely, I ask two questions: 1). Are akratic actions irrational?; 2). Do akratic actions suggest a defect in an agent’s ability to control her actions?

Ultimately, this paper argues that akratic actions are not by default irrational and that performing an akratic action does not guarantee a defect in agency. Contrarily, rationality in the sense of ’self-control’ or refraining from acting on desires can be ’irrational’ in actuality. There are two ways to define rationality that exposes the main problem of thinking of akrasia as a lack in agency. We shall see that rationality and agency are inextricably tied concepts, both to undermine an agent’s choice in performing an akratic action. In this paper, I have first laid out the example of Student Z that illustrates a case of akrasia. Utilizing the example, I wish to show that performing the best action available can unintentionally alienate one from one’s own action, therefore a strange loss of agency. Focusing on this strange consequence by choosing to do the best action available, I will discuss the problematic definition of rationality and its relation to agency. In the end, I propose another way to look at rationality and agency to resolve the problem and leave the possibility of rational akratic actions open.

[^1]: Christine Tappolet. “Emotions and the intelligibility of Akratic Action”. In: _Weakness of Will and Practical Irrationality_ (2003), pp. 97–120. doi: 10.1093/0199257361.003.0005.

## The Problem

### Rationality and Agency

The argument that Z is irrational for choosing to spend time with her friend hinges on a presumption: Even outside of her own reasons or reasoning processes, she also understands that it is just generally better, as others would consider, to write the paper instead of going on the trip. As a reasonable person in the world, she heeds to the general value judgment. Finishing work on time may be a generally more reasonable value or trait to pursue and that it should weigh more in one’s decision-making process. Hence, it seems that a reasonable and well-adjusted human of society should and will choose to spend time writing the paper. What more can be more important than a valuable future? Indeed, the reasoning process we would expect from a logical and rational person resembles the above. We should then strive to uncover the criteria of rationality, the nuance of which seems to have escaped daily usages.

Rationality, in this case, is contingent upon value judgments. There are various ways to phrase the values in this example. Here, we choose to describe the values most optimally. Z needs to decide between the value of furthering some treasured friendship and of writing an important paper that which has a great impact on her grades and, subsequently, her professional success. The interesting problem is that, in fact, Z does not find it hard at all to make a general value judgment concerning rationality. As mentioned before, she agrees with what most people would say is the better decision–the prospect of professional success. She knows that a rational decision defined as such culminates to choosing to write the paper, as much as there is still rationality in furthering a treasured friendship. Then, to many, it would seem like in so much as her actions are performed with this well understanding of general value in mind, the actions are by definition irrational and akratic. She does not make the rational decision, albeit knowing it! If she does not choose to do the better action while knowing that she should, she is making an irrational decision, is she not? Still, we want to think about what would have happened if she were to choose the rational decision.

Say Z chooses to write the paper. It will not be a case of akrasia because Z has successfully executed what she thinks is the best course of action to take. It seems tempting to seal the case and call her action as rational. She consciously performs the better action. Is this not rationality exemplified in full? Nevertheless, how does Z feel about her actions? Is it not imaginable that she can feel estranged from her decision to write the paper? Of course, we are not denying that one may not feel like this in all other cases. The point is that in this example, she knows the responsibility to write the paper, but she does not feel like she has taken action by herself per se. She can almost say that she has been forced by the discipline of responsibility to decide that she does not want to make, though it may represent something else—say, a value—that she wants or something that she should want. She acknowledges that she has to write the paper to get the thing she wants, but she knows that she wants to do the other action much more.

Let us stop and consider: is this case trivial? Even if Z can say that she senses some alienation from the action, is she actually alienated from her action? In any case, one should not overlook the kind of struggle that Z goes through with either action that she ends up choosing. In one case, she is labeled irrational and incomprehensible. In another case, she cannot fully grasp herself in acting. Regardless of whether there is actually a sense of alienation, Z does not need to go through meticulous theorization to conclude that she recognizes that something is off by performing the best course of action available. As we shall see, this intuition brings intriguing consequences.

I wish to show the strangeness that Z can plausibly recognize when she does an action purely because of rationality so conceived. She can convince herself by repeating that she is making the best decision and being fully rational, but she cannot shake away the estrangement that is brought about by not doing what she wants to do the most. She knows she is actively suppressing something personal to her. Therefore, it seems that there is a disconnect between rationality and something else within Z that is at least equally important to her to the point that the lack of which estranges her from her own action. We would commonly call the thing missing here a kind of emotional feeling. Conceptually, it requires a lengthy discussion about the intricacies of ’emotion’ and whether or not it is the best to be used here. Therefore, I shall resort to using drives or desires to capture the non-logical part of us that motivates us to act differently than mere logic.

Time to take a look at the example more closely: how do the two scenarios differ? When Z chooses to go on a trip with her friends, is it plausible that she could have felt estranged in her actions too? Maybe Z is surprised, annoyed, or ashamed at her inability to stick to a hard-working schedule when she has been doing that most of her life. However, it does not seem like she will feel the same kind of estrangement from her choosing to write the paper. In the case of her choosing to go on a trip, Z finds herself aligned with the action she takes—she takes ownership of her action. She is not likely to resort to languages that diminish herself from the action being taken. She recognizes the person taking action and does not see the self as being diminished from taking action. She keeps the interior self intact and awaits exterior repercussions. In other words, Z has the feeling of full agency or feels more like an agent when she takes the supposedly irrational action.

Somehow, taking the rational action contributes to Z feeling out of alignment with her action, and hence a loss of agency. On the one hand, Z is said to lack rationality when she goes on a trip with her friends. On the other hand, Z feels like she lacks agency when she writes the paper. It seems like Z cannot choose an action that is both fully hers (agential and rational. We wish to ask: if Z cannot fully align herself with the supposedly most rational action that she has taken, what does it say about rationality and agency?

Such is the connection now that exists between agency and rational actions in this analysis. How is it that we have come to the dichotomy? Why does taking the rational action contribute to Z feeling not aligned with the action, and hence a loss of agency? Again, when a person acts following drives, we may say that such drives overcome her. Yet, we do not say that she is paralyzed by logic when she acts solely for reasons. If she is an agent when she behaves solely in accordance with reasons, how is she not an agent when she behaves in accordance with drives, based on some reasons? Are emotions, or regardless of what name one wants to call this drive, not hers? It is too arbitrary to think of the self or the agent as somehow disconnected from the non-logical side, which is intuitive and immediately recognizable to her to start with. The part of an agent that is the most intimate to her somehow does not surface in the process of determining whether an agent is fully at work in doing an action.

### The Most Optimal Option

We have shown that rationality so defined seems disconnected from these drives that are just as important for Z for her to claim her own actions. Nevertheless, why should rationality not be able to take into account these drives at least partly? If we return to how the problem of akrasia is being presented, we should notice that it is not immediately clear why the most optimal action should be the action to perform. It is not about how the most optimal action is decided or if one is actually able to come to such a conclusion. Rather, the problem has to do with the concept of the most optimal action itself that requires further investigation. This can turn into a case of circular logic: the action to take is the best action available because the best action available is the action to take. The two are synonyms: then, many things need clarifying when it comes to deciding what the best action available is—and the rationality so-defined is not enough to match, when it has foregone another huge part of the drives that lead us to action. How could the simple case of following what has the most potential to drive one to act something not a cork in the process of rational decision-making?

Recall that we are interested in rationality because akratic actions are usually considered to show some defects in a person—a defect in rationality and a defect in agency. We wish to show that an akratic action by itself does not necessarily mean a defect. We have also shown that somehow rationality so-defined has fallen into the same position as akratic action. A rational action by itself can, in some cases, reveal that the action lacks agency, despite how one often puts rationality and agency in line with each other. When it is imaginable that a rational action can be a defect by the mere fact that the agent feels the action to be less of her own if it is solely supported by rationality, the concept then requires re-examination. In fact, it seems that the problem of rationality can be resolved by considering the private aspect of rationality—private reasons as legitimate reasons.

As examined, the problem of rationality is a dichotomy between public and private rationality. Z feels a lack of agency in her own action principally because she does not recognize the action to be in alignment with what drives her to act. She intuitively spots something that does not belong to her in action, and she realizes the clash between her inner self and the exterior thing outside—which she does not recognize as her own. Without complicating the issue by clarifying the value judgments that consist in rationality, we should find it clear that Z has a set of reasons to act with some amount of drives behind it. The amount of drives that Z has to do something can vary drastically depending on which action she actually desires. It is not to say that the terms that we are using here signal a clean separation between public and private reasons—the point is to recognize that Z would think of some considerations of rationality as more of her own and some more of an external thing. To the more private rationality, Z’s drives—which stem from within herself too—do not clash as much or at all, in comparison to her relation to the more public rationality. Estrangement occurs when the public rationality is too out of alignment with Z’s drives.

So far, we have first started with an investigation into what would have happened if Z had chosen the most optimum decision available. From the fact that such an action somehow gives rise to Z feeling estranged from her own action, we discover the peculiarity about the implication of the so-defined (public) rationality. We discover that this conception of rationality diverges it from another common concept associated with: agency. We ask ourselves: how could one concept alienate and yet signal agency simultaneously? The special status of rationality thus surfaces. We explore how actions that rest solely on drives are designated with action-describing words that signal a lack of control (agency), whereas actions solely based on rationality are not treated in the same light. As a result, we find the definition of rationality to be lacking, hence its possible contradiction with agency.

## Objection

A Davidsonian might object to the setup of akrasia right off the back. She might argue that the original consideration of drives is unnecessary, for there are cases of akrasia that do not involve drives. As Davidson says, "Does it never happen that I have an unclouded, unwavering judgment that my action is not for the best, all things considered, and yet where the action I do perform has no hint of compulsion of the compulsive?"[^2] This objection raises a potential form of akrasia that is sincerely incomprehensible: how can an agent perform an akratic action without any kind of drive whatsoever?

Of course, the agent still has some reasons to perform a worse action. But what is it that compels the agent to act when there is no added value or anything that could have led to the worse action being weighed more than the best alternative? Then, what the agent does seems to be entirely irrational even according to our conception of rationality: nothing in the private rationale of the agent leans towards a worse action! Let us go back to the setup one more time: how could an agent act without some drives in general? Formulating akrasia as such is utterly unimaginable and inapplicable in most cases—why then should an account of akrasia that has implications to rationality and agency take the extreme cases as its foundation? Even if it is somehow realizable, the current account of rationality and agency does not clash with this possibility, as argued before.

Someone might also object: but this is the wrong conception of akratic actions. In fact, what you have proposed seems to diminish what akratic actions are. It does not make sense for akratic actions to be remotely rational, for otherwise, there does not seem to be any problem whatsoever. If it were not because of the fact that akratic actions seem utterly irrational, we would not have questioned if they are something that actually occurs in the first place. This line of argument usually defines akratic actions as irrational actions—hence, per the definition, if there are rational akratic actions, they are, in fact, not akratic actions. It is not hard to spot the circular logic in this kind of argument—a pre-defined notion challenges other definitions because the pre-defined notion does not contain other definitions. The argument amounts to nothing. However, it is worth reflecting if akratic actions have lost their mysterious philosophical halo by being not necessarily irrational.

Are akratic actions still puzzling if they are not necessarily irrational? It seems that the question is still philosophically relevant, especially with respect to the curious situation that choosing an all-things-considered better action can actually be irrational. Akratic actions so defined actually reflect that enkrasia (self-control) can be irrational at times. The ability to control oneself and make the non-drive motivated decision seems the hallmark of rationality. Yet, as we have discussed above, it has overlooked a person’s private rationality. Enkrasia, then, is prone to induce in a person a feeling of estrangement from herself. We have declared that we cannot exactly delineate what consists of rationality, but it seems that the problem of akrasia and possibly the problem of enkrasia can be settled better with a more rigorous examination of rationality and agency in the relevant sense.

Another might object that we are only describing some extreme cases. Usually, when one acts akratically, one is almost like giving in to something they may not want to give in to. This means that some people may not want to have certain drives, hence feeling estranged from their actions in this manner. In response, I want to say that we are not dealing with hard cases like the instance of addiction. As for the example, there are many cases where we consciously—with great control in our action—choose the less good option, fully recognizant of our supposed irrationality. These cases are unlike the ones we talk about, with great regrets for choosing to do one course of action over another. For example, when a person really wants to watch some TV programs, she does not do her homework. A person involved in cases like this clearly does not fully align with their chosen actions—they do not have a drive to watch TV as they do to further and nurture an important friendship. Without delving deep into the details of value judgment, this paper rests content with the general recognition that we can reasonably think of akratic actions as overcome with drives as well as akratic actions acted with drives. However, just like our choice of not talking about addiction, we do not wish to complicate current issues with further arbitrary value judgments.

[^2]: Donald Davidson. _Essays on actions and events_. Clarendon Press, 2013, p. 29.

## Conclusion

In this paper, I have examined the problem of akrasia by arguing that akratic actions are not by default irrational, and they do not necessarily mean a defect in agency. On the contrary, a fully rational action in the public sense can actually be irrational when it is out of alignment with the acting agent’s drives, which is the non-logical part of her that induces actions. On a personal note, the argument with regard to rationality and akrasia matter to me simply because of its ubiquity. I do not recognize in myself the kind of irrationality that an outsider may comment on, even though I recognize that I may not be performing the best action available at times. I find in myself a kind of spirit that holds the muffled notion of rationality and some kind of drives or desires together—the bringing together of wants and reasoning, the culmination of one is me. Not one part of me is lost in making such a decision, especially whenever I can feel that it is I who made the decision. Nor my reasoning or my wants will be present and fulfilled at all times—but I do not see that this is a problem. My wants accompany me at all times, but my reasoning seems harder to grasp—it seems farther away from me.



