@def title = "Minlu Li / What did Mary understand?"
@def tags = ["essays"]

# What did Mary understand?

Let there be a person Mary in a secluded room. She has all relevant expertise for physical science, except that she does not know the concept of color — she has never seen colors other than different shades of blackness. It is a foreign concept, and now we give her all the physical information about colors possible. Physical information presents a dilemma, but we shall take on the issue later. Then, we let Mary out of the room, lead her to a red flower, and tell her that such is red. Mary will at that moment gain a new piece of information—something about colors that she had been incapable of knowing through physical information alone. Hence, proposers of this example say that the new piece of information must not be physical. Like others, a philosopher Frank Jackson calls the new piece of information qualia, which are by definition not physical information. Qualia exist beyond the physical realm and are inexplicable by science. This example measures up to argue that the world is not merely physical. I think Jackson's example cannot prove the existence of qualia because of his wrongful conception of physical information.

Jackson thinks that the point of the example is to illustrate a kind of information that Mary would have never understood while being inside a room. Per this argument, Jackson defines physical information as whatever Mary can understand without going out of the room — wavelengths of color, etc. However, none of the information can capture the feeling that Mary gets when she sees red for the first time. Whatever she understands in the room, she cannot have had what red is like — not through logical inference and any operations on physical knowledge alone. Why is there such a kind of information that we cannot have in the ways that we can have other information? The special case of qualia is some non-physical thing in our supposedly all - physical world. Therefore, the problem at hand is: what makes it impossible for us to give Mary the idea red in the room? And does this inability necessarily translate to the color red not being a piece of entirely physical information?

Can we not give Mary a sheet of red paper and tell her that such is the color red? No, Jackson would oppose the idea because physical information cannot merely be "what could be put down on paper." We can solve the problem by restricting that physical information to be put into words, not pictures. But it is inconceivable why anyone would find this definition of physical information satisfying: does physicality necessarily depend on describability in words? Our experience, in actuality, seems to be entirely physical: we have personal senses to accept the signals from outside, which constitute an experience. The physicality of experience is unconditional: we cannot feel if we do not have the physical capability to feel. And yet, we shall grant Jackson that physical information can be defined as such — only what is described in words is a piece of physical information.

Even in adherence to this definition of physical information, Jackson has found himself a contradiction of some physical information explicable in words and yet not transferrable to Mary. In fact, Mary has not truly understood all the physical information, despite having a background in science. Whatever Mary understands, whenever she encounters the word 'color,' she will have a moment of uncertainty. Her great ability in logic and understanding of science cannot lead to her confidence in understanding colors. She can memorize all the physical information about color, but still, in the back of her mind, she will not have established a genuine connection with 'color,' for she doubts its existence. She does not know if the concept is true or a perfectly fabricated one that we can describe with scientific equations and theories. She will learn about the usage of color as a concept, its sub - concepts, and how it relates to other scientific knowledge. However, she does not truly understand color — for she lacks that which could give her the physical knowledge of "I agree that it is true." This judgment is perfectly describable in words: tell Mary to trust the information given. However, what grounds this judgment? Why is it necessary for Mary to trust the information?

Instead, Mary carries doubt when she comes out of the room. It is only via seeing the red flower that she finishes the logical and physical judgment: what I have learned about color is accurate. This piece of physical information is not teachable  —  we cannot give Mary this line and expect that it is fully understood, meaning that Mary is fully onboard. Mary can merely see the intention we have for her to trust the information. Mary, in this case, stands alienated from the information being given to her — she knows the information yet cannot grasp it and see it as truly her own, unlike the way she knows, for example, how gravity works. The relationship between Mary and the information is a physical one — she merely needs to accept the information as true, something explicable in words. Then, if Mary does not have all the physical information there is — she cannot even be said to understand, but only tacitly accept with great doubts — then it is not true that this example can prove the existence of qualia.

First of all, we cannot give Mary all the physical information there is for the logical inference that "trusting the information" is unteachable. Mary has to derive the conclusion by herself if we assume that she is an independently thinking human being. Secondly, Mary has not understood all the information given to her. It is not a matter of her agreeing with the information or not, but a matter of not being sure about the actual existence of the information. Then, we have come back to the definition of physical information: for physical information is not something that must be explicable and transferable in such a way. Suppose you do not give Mary the optimal learning environment for physical information. In that case, she will not be able to understand in a meaningful way, nor will she have all the information to learn. In effect, the physical learning condition itself requires some physical information to be transferable.

Jackson, in response, may criticize that the realization of whether the information exists or not is, in fact, under the administration of qualia. The impression of qualia helps Mary establish the connection between physical information and the world. Or perhaps, qualia is the connection. To this objection, we ask whether knowing that something is real is not in any way a logical inference realizable through physical information. It seems that Jackson must agree that logical inference is at least partly physical: "Endowing her with great logical acumen and persistence is not in itself enough to fill in the gaps in her knowledge (Jackson, 292)." Indeed her logical acumen does not fill in the gaps. Still, it is not because she is incapable of understanding redness, but that not all physical information about redness has been presented to her for her to make the final logical inference. Her logic is incomplete because teaching in such an environment is insufficient to bestow physical information.

We, therefore, conclude that Jackson has failed to use the example of Mary in the room to prove the existence of qualia. The trouble stems from the assumptions that 1). Physical information is teachable in such an isolated environment; 2). Mary has understood all physical information. We have presented how not all physical information is teachable in this manner, which leads to Mary's insufficient understanding of the physical information presented. Such insufficiency accounts for her being unable to understand redness before being left out of the room: the lack of physical information, not necessarily the existence of qualia, makes her truly understand and receive a new piece of information.
